---
layout: post
title:  THE FORGOTTEN PEOPLE OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS
date:   2021-03-16
---

# THE FORGOTTEN PEOPLE OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS

<p>There had been a war</p>
<p>raging inside Bianca’s six year old bones</p>
<p>white cells had staked their flag</p>
<p>they conquered the territory of her tiny body</p>
<p>they saw it as their destiny</p>
<p>they said it was manifested</p>
<p style="padding-left:300px;">It</p>
<p style="padding-left:340px;">all</p>
<p style="padding-left:500px;">fell</p>
<p style="padding-left:540px;">out</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>I felt</p>
<p>bald and blank as Bianca’s skull</p>
<p>when they closed her casket</p>
<p>hymns wafting into the night sky</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>

(Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner, “Fishbone Hair”)

<p>&nbsp;</p>

“Fishbone Hair” is a poem by Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner, a Marshallese poet, about her niece Bianca Lanki who died of leukemia when she was eight years old. Bianca is one of the many Marshallese people who have succumbed to cancer and other illnesses caused by radiation. This radiation is part of the painful and destructive legacy of U.S. nuclear testing in the Marshall Islands. The most destructive test, Operation Castle-Bravo, was conducted on March 1, 1954. The outcome was a disaster. Following the blast, Rongelap atoll, as well as two other nearby atolls were blanketed in radioactive fallout. At the time, the U.S. claimed that this was an accident, caused by unexpected wind conditions and the high yield which was more than twice what was calculated. After spending 48 hours in the fallout, where children played in the radioactive ash they thought was snow, the people who lived on Rongelap atoll were evacuated on March 3.[^1] They spent three years living on U.S. military bases and small islands before being returned to Rongelap in 1957 and told they were safe. In 2012, many decades after the Rongelap people had their lives irreversibly changed by Bravo, the U.S. government reaffirmed its position that the Rongelap people had been adequately compensated and that no further aid was owed.[^2] In reality, the United States abandoned the Rongelap people after returning them to their irradiated home in 1957, and they have had to fight for help alone ever since. 

This paper fits into a broader field of historiography called Global Hibakusha. Hibakusha is a Japanese term that translates to explosion-affected person and refers to the survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. While Hiroshima and Nagasaki are the most well-known nuclear events, survivors of nuclear weapons and testing exist around the world. Global Hibakusha aims to bring attention to these victims who are not often recognized. It also aims to link distant Hibakusha communities and build a more cohesive history of the social impacts of nuclear testing.[^3] Through telling the story of the Rongelap people, whose struggle as a result of radiation and fight for justice has been practically forgotten, they can have a stronger presence in the history of nuclear testing. In terms of methodology, this paper takes a post-colonial approach by including the perspective of the Rongelap people instead of just their nuclear colonizers. Through analyzing the Rongelap peoples’ interviews, speeches, testimonies, and films, as well as U.S. military documents, newspaper articles, medical and radiological surveys, and government hearings, this paper will offer a thorough view of how the Rongelap people have been failed, and what they have done to fight for justice. 

The United States has tried to avoid responsibility for Castle-Bravo and never fulfilled its obligation to help the people who were exposed to severe radiation. The U.S. obligation to help the Rongelap people is clear. Even if the Castle-Bravo disaster were an accident, like the U.S. claims, it was an accident that could have been avoided through more careful calculations, waiting to have a better understanding of the weapons they were testing, or simply not using someone else’s home to test nuclear weapons. The fallout and the lives that were destroyed by radiation were completely the fault of the U.S. However, some scholars do not accept the accident excuse. A Global Hibakusha article written by Dr. Seiichiro Takemine presents evidence from U.S. government reports that the wind and high yield was not ‘unexpected’ as the U.S. claimed in 1954. In particular, the military knew that the wind conditions did not match the predictions 13 hours ahead of the test, and still decided to move forward. Additionally, months before the Bravo test scientists calculated possible fallout radiuses in order to safely position military personnel. One of these estimates was made for a 20 Megaton yield. The ‘unexpectedly high’ yield of Operation Bravo was 15 Megatons.[^4] The 15 Megaton yield may have not matched the final calculations, but it was not outside the range of reasonable expectations. This evidence shows that the consequences of Castle-Bravo could not have been an accident and were instead the result of the U.S. simply overlooking the lives of the Rongelap people. Further, this makes it completely unacceptable that the U.S. still will not accept responsibility for these events and has not fully helped and compensated the victims. 

The initial U.S. response to the fallout on Rongelap was limited yet began a narrative that the Rongelap people had already been helped enough. The U.S. evacuated the Rongelap people on March 3, 1954 and brought them to a Naval base on Kwajalein Atoll. Here, they were treated for severe radiation injuries. When it became clear that Rongelap would not be safe to return to for some time, the people were moved to a temporary settlement on Ejit. These events were recounted in an article published in the Honolulu Advertiser 4 months after the Bravo shot. The author, S. H. Riesenberg, was an anthropologist who worked for the U.S. Trust Territory that controlled Micronesia during the testing. Beyond recounting the events, the article also contains hints that the U.S. did not accept blame for what happened and was trying to avoid blame internationally. First, besides a short preamble that says the nuclear test had “unexpected results,” the author does not acknowledge that the U.S. was at fault.[^5] Instead, the article focuses on how much the U.S. has helped Rongelap, and presents the help as coming from kindness instead of an obligation to rectify the situation. Second, the article mostly leaves out the Rongelap peoples’ perspectives, except when it benefits the U.S. image. Riesenberg describes the Rongelap people as excited to be on the Navy base seeing movies and watching planes land—while many of them were suffering from radiation poisoning.[^6] Later, when the Rongelap people were living in their temporary settlement, Riesenberg described them as “well settled,” even though Ejit island did not have the resources to support them and they were surviving on rations.[^7] The article mostly focuses on the Utirik people, who were also evacuated after Bravo, but were much less badly affected than the Rongelap people and able to return home after a few months. This presentation of events was an attempt to minimize the U.S.’s responsibility for the disaster and control their public image. However, from 1954 to 1957, the U.S. was actively assisting the Rongelap people. After returning them home—which Riesenberg estimated would take a few months[^8] but ended up taking three years—U.S. assistance would completely stop, and the government would continue to minimize the impact of the Bravo disaster. 

Since returning home in 1957, the Rongelap people have been met with resistance, misinformation, and indifference from the U.S. government while facing severe, radiation-related health issues. John Anjain, the leader of the Rongelap people when the Bravo test occurred, was promised by the U.N. Trusteeship Council,[^9] as well as U.S. government officials, that there was only a little bit of radiation left on Rongelap, but that it was an insignificant amount that should not injure their health much.[^10]  This slight reassurance from the U.S. was enough for the Rongelap people to return home. They were hoping that they could return to their previous lives and put the illness and misery they experienced over the previous three years behind them. This was not the case. Soon after their return, more death and health issues related to radiation exposure began to occur.  Kiosang Kios was 15 years old when Operation Bravo occurred and received a high dose of radiation that caused burns and made her hair fall out. These immediate effects were just the beginning, as Kiosang would face consequences from the radiation that would haunt her for the rest of her life. Beginning in 1957, Kiosang began to have many issues giving birth. She gave birth to a baby that had no bones with skin that felt like paper. This baby died in less than a day. She then had several more stillbirths and miscarriages, and ultimately gave birth to a child who had thyroid problems and severe issues with her legs.[^11] In addition to the pain of losing a child, miscarriages carried additional shame for Marshallese women. This is described in the poem Monster by Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner, which is about the women like Kiosang who gave birth to deformed babies. These women buried their stillborn babies and hid miscarriages to avoid the shame from their families. In Marshallese culture, it is believed that women who have miscarriages have been unfaithful to their husbands.[^12] Mothers hid miscarriages from their husbands because they did not want to be accused of being unfaithful. This also likely decreased the miscarriage and deformity statistics for Rongelap, which would be the subject of subsequent medical studies. The poem also compares these mothers to a monster in Marshallese culture, the Mejenkwaad, a woman who goes crazy and turns into a demon that eats her own babies.[^13] Stories about mothers who turn into monsters were likely in the heads of women who gave birth to deformed babies, turned into monsters themselves by the radiation. These fears and health issues were widespread upon the return to the atoll and caused the Rongelap people to question if U.S. had told the truth when they were promised the atoll was safe.  

Meanwhile, the U.S. continued the reassure the Rongelap people that their home was safe and that they were not in danger from radiation.[^14] Acknowledging that the atoll was not safe would mean accepting further responsibility and admitting the situation was worse than what had been shared with the public. However, the U.S. cared more about reaffirming their stance than helping the Rongelap people, and so they stayed on the atoll. These false reassurances were not just given to the Rongelap people, but also the rest of the world.

U.S. media made a distinct effort to minimize the government’s liability for the damages nuclear testing caused. In the 1960s, while the Rongelap people were living on their irradiated islands and receiving false reassurances from the U.S. government, a Hawaiian newspaper, the Honolulu Advertiser, printed stories about how good everything was on Rongelap. The article ‘Fallout Children’ Show No Evidence of Defects claimed that despite high rates of thyroid problems among Rongelap children, most of the cases were benign. The article also claimed that the infant mortality rate and birth defect rate on Rongelap was completely normal.[^15]  Some articles went even further in misrepresenting the situation on Rongelap. ’54 Bikini Blast Boon to Victims reported that not only were the Rongelap people completely free of radiation, miscarriages, and deformed babies by 1962, but that they were now prospering. The article says that the Rongelap people “never had it so good,” and that they were the “richest in the Territory” after receiving houses with aluminum roofs, 10 coconuts trees, and concrete water cisterns through U.S. aid.[^16]  These articles seem to be trying to redirect the world’s attention from the fact that the U.S. nuked the Rongelap people. They imply that the U.S. was no longer responsible for any damages after they went above and beyond helping the victims of nuclear testing. 

Medical research conducted on Rongelap also aimed to reinforce that everything was okay. The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission funded several studies about the health conditions on Rongelap. One such 1962 study found that rates of death, miscarriages, and illness on Rongelap were not abnormal.[^17] The results of these studies directly contradicted the experiences of the people living on Rongelap. These studies were funded by the same organization that ran the nuclear testing, but this conflict of interest was ignored. The results were accepted by U.S. newspapers, and used by the government to dismiss the Rongelap peoples’ concerns about their health and their atoll. 

This pattern of disinformation surrounding the real health impacts and lingering effects of radiation was not unique to the Rongelap people. The Global Hibakusha Project, which interviewed and analyzed several Hibakusha communities around the world, found that “irrespective of national government each group was met with scientific and medical obfuscation, official denials, and disinformation.”[^18] The U.S. government, and the other nuclear powers that exposed people to radiation through nuclear testing, were trying to decrease their responsibility and draw attention away from the atrocities they caused. This coverup of radiation exposure is related to why so few people know about the victims of nuclear testing, not only in Rongelap, but around the world.

Beyond creating disinformation, the unusually high volume of medical studies also caused concern among the Rongelap people. Medical studies began immediately following the blast, and were performed annually through 15 years after Bravo, and continued occasionally beyond.[^19] The heightened medical interest in the Rongelap people, especially in comparison to how little government assistance has been received, has led many Rongelap people to believe that they were deliberately used as guinea pigs for a radiation experiment.[^20] This belief is not unfounded, especially since there is evidence that the U.S. knew that the fallout would cover Rongelap before the test. U.S. scientists also openly referred to the Rongelap people as test subjects. Dr. Merrill Eisenbud, referring to the prime research opportunity the Rongelap people presented, stated in an AEC meeting in 1956, “Now, data of this type has never been available. While it is true that these people do not live the way westerners do, civilized people, it is nonetheless also true that they are more like us than the mice.”[^21] 

This is the attitude that the Rongelap people faced and the fears they had as they continued to ask the U.S. for answers and aid. The veneer of safety came crashing down in 1983 when the Rongelap people were presented with a Department of Energy Radiological Survey that had been conducted in 1978 and determined that parts of Rongelap atoll were as contaminated as Bikini atoll.[^22]  The Bikini islanders had long been removed from their homes because of the radiation, but the Rongelap people were left to live on their equally contaminated atoll. This confirmed the suspicions that Rongelap was not safe like the U.S. claimed. 

Despite U.S. resistance, the Rongelap people have long fought for the aid and compensation they deserve. This fight intensified after learning about the harmful radiation left on Rongelap from the 1978 DOE survey, which gave the Rongelap people evidence to directly petition the U.S. government for help. Now that they knew conclusively that their atoll was unsafe, their priority was moving. Jeton and John Anjain, as well as other members of the Rongelap community, requested this from the U.S. government at a hearing in 1984. They asked for $20 million to relocate 1,000 people and build a new community on another atoll.[^23] This request was not granted and was only met with further assurances from the U.S. that Rongelap was safe.[^24] With no other options, the islanders turned to Greenpeace, the environmental activism organization. Greenpeace used the ship the Rainbow Warrior to transport the Rongelap people to Mejato, about 100 miles away.[^25] The Rongelap people refused to stop fighting for their health and safety, and through consistent efforts they were able to escape their irradiated atoll in 1985. They spent 28 years living in contamination, repeatability being told that nothing was wrong.

This coincided with another political issue in the Marshall Islands that threatened the Rongelap people: The Compact of Free Association (COFA). COFA, which began being drafted in 1980, aimed to bring a degree of sovereignty to some Micronesian states, including the Republic of the Marshall Islands. COFA also guaranteed economic assistance for the Micronesian states and military usage for the U.S., among other provisions.[^26] The Rongelap people, as well as others in the Marshall Islands, found that the U.S. had put unfair legislation into specific sections of COFA. Aisen Tima, a Rongelap man who was 5 months old when Bravo occurred, voiced his concerns with COFA in an interview from 1985. He said that Section 177, which focused on economic aid for nuclear victims, had a clause that would prevent the Rongelap people from bringing their claims to U.S. courts. Aisen was concerned that his two young daughters would have medical issues in the future, like many Rongelap children, and that he would be left without recourse if Section 177 were passed.[^27]  Aisen was not a politician, but like many other Rongelap people, would be deeply affected by political issues like Section 177. This led to widespread political involvement among the Rongelap people, who would lobby governments, testify at hearings, and give speeches to fight for their home and their safety. COFA was passed via plebiscite with Section 177 unchanged, but Rongelap continued to fight against the issue. Rongelap politicians went to the U.S. to raise these concerns in Congress.[^28] Since then, COFA has been amended, and Section 177 no longer contains the clause that would prevent legal actions from being taken.[^29] Through widespread political involvement and refusing the give up, the Rongelap people were beginning to win small victories against the U.S. These victories would result in the U.S. taking more responsibility for the consequences of Bravo and due aid being given to the Rongelap people. 

After the evacuation of Rongelap, an accurate radiological survey was needed to determine if it would ever be safe to return. All previous radiological surveys had been conducted by the same organizations that would be held responsible if Rongelap was found to be contaminated. An independent survey was needed in order to get the unbiased truth. This is what the Rongelap people asked for when they went to Congress yet again to try and help their people in 1989.[^30] This time, several members of the Rongelap community, including some who could only speak Marshallese, testified to share their stories of what radiation had done to them and about how desperately they want to safely return home. A study that was fully independent from the U.S. was never conducted. However, a separate Committee was setup that oversaw radiological assessments for the Marshall Islands. In 1994, a study was finally completed that found that Rongelap would not be safe to return to without significant cleanup effort.[^31] This was the first time that a U.S. organization admitted that Rongelap was unsafe, which meant it had been unsafe since 1954. An accurate assessment of the atoll would have never been conducted without the unfaltering political fight and total involvement of the Rongelap people.

Rongelap now had to be decontaminated. In 1996, the U.S. devoted $45 to the Republic of the Marshall Islands that were to be devoted to cleanup and resettlement.[^32] This was yet another victory from the many years of political action, but still not enough. In 1999 interviews with residents of Rongelap they raised multiple concerns with the funding. First, the $40 million dollars would be barely enough to cover the process, as it involved removed the topsoil and replacing it with crushed coral, as well as new construction and other expensive operations. Second, the funding did not cover cleanup for other islands in the atoll than the main one, which although were not traditionally inhabited, were used to gather food and grow copra and were vital to the people. Finally, if further sources of radiation are found or radiation safety standards change, the funding would not be enough to fully clean Rongelap.[^33] These issues, and the long process of providing adequate aid to the Rongelap people, show that the damage done by Operation Bravo could be quickly or easily solved. It will take many more decades before safety can be guaranteed and health issues can be adequately addressed. This shows that we can never accept claims from the U.S. that the Rongelap people have been adequately compensated at face value. Time and again, the U.S. claimed that everything was safe and well on Rongelap, before more evidence surfaced, usually through the persistence of the Rongelap people, proving that they were still in danger. 

The cultural impacts of nuclear testing in Rongelap have been severe but are much harder to quantify than issues like cancer rates and radiation levels. One way these cultural impacts can be explored is through cultural works like poetry. A theme in Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner’s poetry is how nuclear testing has hurt the Marshallese language. In the poem On the Couch with Būbu Nein, Jetñil-Kijiner recounts struggling to communicate with her grandmother. Her grandmother had tongue cancer and could no longer speak her native and only language of Marshallese. Jetñil-Kijiner, in return, struggled to speak Marshallese to her grandmother, as she was ashamed of her accent which sounded very English from living in Hawai’i.[^34] In the grandmother’s case, radiation has directly taken her ability to talk, and she could no longer share stories with her granddaughter. In Jetñil-Kijiner’s case, she moved at a young age to a safer place to live, as radiation had contaminated large parts of her homeland, taking her away from her native language. This theme exists in other poems, like in Bursts of Bianca, which is also about Jetñil-Kijiner’s niece who died of leukemia. Jetñil-Kijiner observes that Bianca, like many Marshallese, is fluent in the language of cancer (terms like blood cells, bone marrow, catheter, and remission therapy) despite knowing little other English.[^35] The Marshallese people’s language has been invaded with English medical terms that it is unfortunate for anyone, especially eight-year-old girls, to be forced to know. This is just one of the lasting impacts that nuclear testing has had on the culture of the Marshall Islands. 

Today, the Rongelap people still face many lingering issues from nuclear testing. In 2012, the U.N. Human Rights Council published a report on the legacy of the nuclear testing program in the Marshall Islands. The U.N. found that nuclear testing has turned many people of the Marshall Islands into, “nomads who are disconnected from their lands and their cultural and indigenous ways of life.”[^36] This is especially true for the Rongelap people, many of whom fear that their atoll is still too contaminated to return to. These fears are due partially to how many times the U.S. has lied about the state of Rongelap, as well as that only one third of the main island of Rongelap had been effectively decontaminated by 2012.[^37] The U.N. reported also provided recommendations to the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the U.S. on how to address the remaining issues caused by nuclear testing. These recommendations included that a radiological survey be conducted by U.N. agencies independent of the United States, that the U.S. and the R.M.I. develop a full strategy to address the widespread lingering health issues, and that the U.S. provide full access to the environmental, health, and historical records of its nuclear testing program to the R.M.I.[^38] These U.N. recommendations were analyzed by researchers from the Global Hibakusha Project. While they found that most of the recommendations were “laudable,” they had problems with a few. Specifically, the recommendation that a radiological study be conducted by U.N. agencies. The researchers believe that no study conducted by agencies made up of nuclear powers could ever be independent enough to be accurate.[^39] This belief is supported by the trend of nuclear powers hiding the truth about the radiation that remains at nuclear test sites, which was identified by Global Hibakusha researchers. It is also supported by how long the U.S. continued to conduct inadequate medical studies of Rongelap and lie about the dangers of living there, just to avoid responsibility. It is clear that all U.S. reports and studies on the people its testing program has harmed should be subjected to intense scrutiny.

The U.N. report also gave final, direct recommendations to the U.S. in their report on the Marshall Islands. They recommended that the U.S. fully compensate Marshallese individuals from the nuclear claims fund, and that a presidential acknowledgement and apology should be issued for the damages caused by nuclear testing.[^40] The U.S. responded to these recommendations shortly after the U.N. report was published:

> The United States acknowledges the negative effects of our nuclear testing program and has accepted, and acted on, our responsibility to the people of the Marshall Islands. As part of the 1986 Compact of Free Association, the United States and the Marshall Islands agreed to a “full and final settlement” of all claims related to the nuclear testing.[^41]

No presidential acknowledgement or apology was ever issued. According to the U.S., nothing else is owed to the Marshall Islands because of a document that was bargained between a global superpower and the residents of a small trust territory 35 years ago. As long as people in the Marshall Islands are still being killed by radiation-caused cancers, parts of the Marshall Islands are too contaminated for people to safely return to their homes, and not every victim has been compensated for the decades of hardship and loss that they have endured as a result of the nuclear testing, the United States has failed in its responsibility to address what it has done to the Marshallese people.

The U.S. still denies responsibility for how Operation Bravo affected the Rongelap people. They initially claimed it was an accident, and then led a multi-decade long disinformation campaign to avoid responsibility and attention for their actions. Meanwhile, they used the Rongelap people as prime medical examples of radiation victims. Despite being subjected to this, the Rongelap people directly fought the U.S. in Congress for aid and compensation, organized their own evacuation of their irradiated atoll, and then finally convinced the U.S. to fund an accurate study and cleanup of their home. Still, the Rongelap people’s fight is not over. Many of them face health problems caused by the radiation they were exposed too and are still unable to return to their home atoll. Few people know about what happened to the Rongelap people. Even among scholars, little research exists specifically on Rongelap. This lack of awareness is what has allowed the U.S. to mistreat the Rongelap people for so long. Through bringing attention to these forgotten people, we may enable them to get the health care, restoration, and compensation they need and deserve.

## FOOTNOTES
[^1]: "Operation CASTLE Commanders Report", Video, Internet Archive, Posted by Joint Task Force 7, 1954, 6:00, <https://archive.org/details/CastleCommandersReport1954>.
[^2]: U.S. Mission Geneva, "U.S. Statement on the Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Implications for Human Rights of the Environmentally Sound Management and Disposal of Hazardous Substances and Wastes, Calin Georgescou, on His Mission to the Republic of the Marshall Islands, March 26 to March 29, 2012," News release, September 18, 2012, <https://geneva.usmission.gov/2012/09/18/hrc-statement-on-u-s-efforts-to-address-the-impacts-of-nuclear-testing-in-the-marshall-islands/>.
[^3]: Mick Broderick and Robert Jabobs, "The Global Hibakusha Project: Nuclear Post-colonialism and Its Intergenerational Legacy," Unlikely, no. 5, <http://unlikely.net.au/issue-05/the-global-hibakusha-project>.
[^4]: Seiichiro Takemine, "Global Hibakusha' and the Invisible Victims of the U.S. Nuclear Testing in the Marshall Islands," *Regional Ecological Challegnes for Peace in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and Asia Pacific*, by Ursula Oswarld Spring, Hans Gunter Brauch, Serrena Erendira Serrano Oswald, and Juliet Bennett, 125-36, Springer, Cham, 2016, <https://link-springer-com.ezproxy.lib.calpoly.edu/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-319-30560-8_7>.
[^5]: S.H. Riesenberg, "Modern Atomic Exiles: Fallout of Radioactive Material in Bomb Test Forced Evacuation of Marshallese," *The Honolulu Advertiser*, July 15, 1954, newspapers.com.
[^6]: Riesenberg, "Modern Atomic Exiles: Fallout".
[^7]: Riesenberg, "Modern Atomic Exiles: Relocated Rongelapese Will Return Some Day; Their Migration Will Be a Legend," *The Honolulu Advertiser*, July 17, 1954, newspapers.com.
[^8]: Riesenberg, "Modern Atomic Exiles: Relocated".
[^9]: The U.N. Trusteeship Council oversaw Trust Territories, such as the U.S. Trust Territory in Micronesia that contained Rongelap.
[^10]: John Anjain, interview, *Atomic Atolls*, 1981, <https://bba5620c586b48f2ad7ea60cc6705f89.filesusr.com/ugd/d75784_02b0bf2c1b5e40cd8f98a0ac0c82db05.pdf>.
[^11]: Kioisang Kios, interview, *Atomic Atolls*, 1985, <https://bba5620c586b48f2ad7ea60cc6705f89.filesusr.com/ugd/d75784_ca2873ef66af4dfb9f01514f06d3ea70.pdf>.
[^12]: Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner, "New Year, New Monsters, New Poems," *Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner (blog)*, January 25, 2018, <https://www.kathyjetnilkijiner.com/new-year-new-monsters-and-new-poems/>.
[^13]: "Monster 怪物" Video, Youtube, posted by United For Peace Film Festival, September 25, 2017, <https://youtu.be/m8OJulGi1Rg>.
[^14]: Jeton Anjain, "Senator John Anjain Acceptance Speech," *The Right Livelihood Foundation*, December 31, 1991, <https://www.rightlivelihoodaward.org/speech/acceptance-speech-senator-jeton-anjain-the-rongelap-people/>.
[^15]: Gene Hunter, "‘Fallout Children’ Show No Evidence of Defects," *The Honolulu Advertiser* (Honolulu, HI), April 9, 1967, newspapers.com.
[^16]: Robert C. Miller, "‘54 Blast Boon to Victims," *The Honolulu Advertiser* (Honolulu, HI), August 6, 1962, newspapers.com.
[^17]: Robert A. Conard, H. Eugene Macdonald, Leo M. Meyer, and Stanton Cohn. *Medical Survey of the Rongelap People Seven Years after Exposure to Fallout*, Upton, NY: Brookhaven National Laboratory, 1962, <https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015086582015&view=1up&seq=1>.
[^18]: Broderick, "The Global Hibakusha Project."
[^19]: An immediate study was conducted in 1954 by Cronkite called Some Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Human Beings. Subsequent annual medical surveys were all conducted by Conard between 1956 and 1969, with an additional survey conducted in 1980. All surveys can be found on Hathi Trust with the titles Medical Survey of Rongelap People X Years After Exposure.
[^20]: Adams Jonas Horowitz, *Nuclear Savage*, 2011, <https://calpoly.kanopy.com/video/nuclear-savage>.
[^21]: Anjain, "Right Livelihood Acceptance Speech", referencing Minutes of A.E.C. Meeting.
[^22]: Anjain, "Right Livelihood Acceptance Speech".
[^23]: *Compact of Free Association: Hearings Before the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs*, 98th Cong., 2d Sess, (1984), <https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.aa0000565705&view=1up&seq=1>.
[^24]: Anjain, "Right Livelihood Acceptance Speech".
[^25]: Erroll Willet, "Greenpeace Evacuates Marshall Islanders," UPI, May 22, 1985, <https://www.upi.com/Archives/1985/05/22/Greenpeace-evacuates-Marshall-Islanders/8656485582400/>.
[^26]: Committee on Energy and National Resources, *Compact of Free Association Amendments Act of 2003*, H. R. Rep. No. 108-159, 1st Sess. (Oct 1, 2003), <https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=pur1.32754077081028&view=1up&seq=1&q1=rongelap>.
[^27]: Aisen Tima, interview, *Atomic Atolls*, July 2, 1985, <https://bba5620c-586b-48f2-ad7e-a60cc6705f89.filesusr.com/ugd/d75784_f322c7e527224f45bf1ddad8c194caf3.pdf>.
[^28]: *Compact of Free Association: Hearings*.
[^29]: *Compact of Free Association Amendments Act*.
[^30]: *Safety of Rongelap Atoll: Hearings Before the Interior and Insular Affairs*, 101st Cong., 1st Sess, (1989), <https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=pst.000017580571&view=1up&seq=1>.
[^31]: National Research Council, *Radiological Assessments for the Resettlement of Rongelap in the Republic of the Marshall Islands*, 1994, <https://doi.org/10.17226/2352>.
[^32]: *Rongelap Resettlement Act of 1999*, H.R. Rep. No. 106-404, 1st Sess, (Oct. 20, 1999), <https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=pur1.32754069222689&view=1up&seq=1>.
[^33]: Giff Johnson, "Questions Linger over Whether Rongelap Will Ever Be Safe," *Pacific Islands Monthly*, August 1, 1999, 42-43, <https://nla.gov.au/nla.obj-346189873/view?sectionId=nla.obj-347029299&partId=nla.obj-346202001#page/ n40/mode/1up>.
[^34]: Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner, "On the Couch with Būbu Nein," Iep Jāltok, 42-44, Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2017.
[^35]: Kathy Jetñil-Kijiner, "Bursts of Bianca," Iep Jāltok, 39-41, Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 2017.
[^36]: Calin Georgescu, *Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Implications for Human Rights of the Environmentally Sound Management and Disposal of Hazardous Substances and Wastes*, September 3, 2012, 9, <https://apjjf.org/data/UNMarshallIslands.pdf>.
[^37]: Georgescu, *Report of the Special Rapporteur*, 15.
[^38]: Georgescu, *Report of the Special Rapporteur*, 16-18.
[^39]: Robert Jacobs and Mick Broderick, "国際連合報告書、マーシャル諸島における核植民地主義の遺物存続を明かす", [United Nations Report Reveals the Ongoing Legacy of Nuclear Colonialism in the Marshall Islands], The Asia-Pacific Journal 10, no. 47 (November 18. 2012), <https://apjjf.org/2012/10/47/Robert-Jacobs/3853/article.html>.
[^40]: Georgescu, *Report of the Special Rapporteur*, 18.
[^41]: U.S. Mission Geneva, "U.S. Statement".

